this is Cain Drew's from a National
Weather Service in Tucson what's the
monsoon going to be like this year
that's probably one of the most commonly
heard questions around Southeast Arizona
at this time of year this video will
take a look at some of the key factors
that go into making a precipitation
forecast for the monsoon which extends
from jun 15th through September 30th
while there are many factors to consider
when making such a forecast will
consider three of the most common ocean
temperatures current drought areas and
climate models warmer than normal
temperatures in the equatorial Pacific
Ocean or El Nino usually means a drier
than normal monsoon for Southeast
Arizona but not always the current
drought in parts of the western US could
actually lead to above normal rainfall
for us the longer term climate computer
simulations are indicating that a wetter
monsoon is in the offing we'll take a
look at each of these factors in more
detail in a minute or two so how much
rain is normal obviously that depends on
where you are exactly in general
southern and eastern areas of Southeast
Arizona tend to get more rainfall than
northern and western areas and mountains
tend to receive more rain than valleys
and in general average rainfall ramps up
as the summer progresses peaking in July
and August and waning again in September
but this all varies from year to year in
this series of maps heavier average rain
amounts are indicated in orange and red
with those areas normally receiving
three to six inches of rain during the
month indicated in this series of maps
the amount of rain that fell in 2014 is
compared to average greens and blues
indicate areas which received more rain
than average for that particular month
in 2014 while yellows and oranges show
where it was drier than normal july of
last year was sort of hit and miss while
much of Cochise County in western pima
county received above-average rainfall
last August then of course there was
September when norbert and Odile helped
bring above normal rainfall to much of
Southeast Arizona the relationship
between El Nino and our monsoon
is not as strong as it is when we are
talking about winter precipitation but
by and large the warmer temperatures in
the equatorial Pacific which are shown
in orange on the graphic on the upper
right tend to lead to a drier summer in
Southeast Arizona the flip side to that
is the warmer temperatures tend to favor
the development of a greater number of
tropical storms and hurricanes in the
eastern Pacific if their moisture can
make it this far north southeast Arizona
can get increased rainfall this would
usually take place in September such as
was the case last year the graphic on
the lower right shows that nearly all
models are predicting a continuation of
warm eastern pacific ocean temperatures
into the coming winter that could mean a
wet winter for us but for now back to
the monsoon these tables show various
cities across Southeast Arizona and the
number of years monsoon rainfall was
either above below or near normal when
an El Nino was present like was
mentioned earlier El Nino usually leads
to a drier than normal monsoon but other
factors can come into play that that
caused us not to be a hard fast rule
another factor that can influence the
monsoon is believe it or not drought in
order for monsoonal moisture to advance
and persist as far north as Arizona high
pressure to our South needs to shift
northward well the high doesn't set in
the exact same location all summer long
it can favor one region over another for
a number of weeks the area of high
pressure is really a dome of very warm
air during the summer and as such tends
to favor areas that have been
persistently dry through the winter and
spring this year much of the
Intermountain West fits that description
as seen here by the drought monitor on
the left and the mountain snowpack map
on the right if the area of high
pressure favors the Great Basin as in
the simulation shown a favorable flow of
moisture into Arizona from the southeast
could result leading to more days with
significant rainfall a consensus of
longer-term computer models are
indicating that july august and
September will end up wetter than normal
across much of the western United States
including southeast Arizona as shown in
green in the top graphic while the
official outlook from
Climate Prediction Center is a general
agreement with the climate models for a
good portion of the Rockies and southern
plains in Southeast Arizona their
forecast is not as clear-cut calling for
equal chances of a wet dry or near
average monsoon in some areas and
favoring above-average rainfall in
Cochise Graham and Greeley counties as
shown on the bottom map similar outlooks
not shown here for the august through
october period and the sep tember
through november period are more
decidedly wet in conclusion all the
factors that go into determining what
kind of monsoon we'll have in Southeast
Arizona are not in complete agreement as
is usually the case some areas will
receive more rain than others throughout
the monsoon and certainly on any given
day however there does seem to be some
agreement that the latter half of the
monsoon may be a bit wetter than the
first part like it was last year will
that mean that will experience the
widespread rainfall as a result of
tropical cyclones again this year maybe
maybe not but we should all be prepared
for flash flooding and the dangers
associated with thunderstorms during the
monsoon thank you for listening to this
presentation for additional information
about the monsoon climate prediction and
monsoon safety see the websites listed
here all of these are linked from the
national weather service tucson website
weather gov one soon safety Awareness
Week is jun 14th through the 19th this
year so stay tuned for more information
and stay safe